Conditional CU metering (#1)
tao-stones/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/simd-XXXX-vm-consume-budget-for-percise-failure.md

---
simd: 'XXXX'
title: Conditional CU metering
authors:
  - Tao Zhu (Anza)
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2024-MM-DD
feature: 
supersedes: 
superseded-by:
extends:
---

## Summary

> Adjusting how CU consumption is measured based on the conditions of Basic Block execution: successful completion will charge actual CUs, or requested CU if exceptions during Basic Block execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adjusting how CU consumption is measured based on the conditions of transaction execution: successful completion will consume actual CUs, but certain irregular failures will result in the transaction automatically consuming all requested CUs.
```

## Motivation

### Background:

In the Solana protocol, tracking transaction Compute Unit (CU) consumption is a critical aspect of maintaining consensus. Block costs are part of this consensus, meaning that all clients must agree on the execution cost of each transaction, including those that error out during execution. Ensuring consistency in CU tracking across clients is essential for maintaining protocol integrity.

### Proposed Change:

> To improve performance, Solana programs are often compiled into Basic Blocks — linear sequences of BPF instructions with a single entry and exit point, and no loops or branches. Basic Blocks allow for efficient execution by reducing the overhead associated with tracking CU consumption for each individual BPF instruction.

Reviewer: This still seems like background to me
```suggestion
To improve performance, Solana programs are often compiled with a JIT that works at the level of Basic Blocks — linear sequences of sBPF instructions with a single entry and exit point, and no loops or branches. Basic Blocks allow for efficient execution by reducing the overhead associated with tracking CU consumption for each individual BPF instruction.
```

> When a Basic Block is executed successfully (i.e., it exits at the final BPF instruction in the block), the total CU consumption is deterministic and can be calculated before execution. This ensures that CU accounting for successful transactions is accurate and predictable, enabling all clients to agree on the transaction’s execution cost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other than in rare, exceptional situations discussed below, the total CU consumption for a Basic Block is deterministic and, and CU accounting can be done once per basic block instead of at each instruction.
A transaction completing successfully or with most errors implies that execution exited each basic block at its single exit point, 
and thus that the total CU consumption of the execution is equal to the sum of the CU cost of each Basic Block executed.
```

However, when an exception is thrown during the execution of a Basic Block (e.g., a null memory dereference or other faults), determining the exact number of CUs consumed up to the point of failure requires additional effort. For instance, the Agave client implements a mechanism that tracks the Instruction Pointer (IP) or Program Counter (PC) to backtrack and estimate the CUs consumed when an exception occurs. More details on this mechanism can be found [here](https://github.com/solana-labs/rbpf/blob/57139e9e1fca4f01155f7d99bc55cdcc25b0bc04/src/jit.rs#L267).

> While this approach is effective, it introduces additional work and complexity. These mechanisms are often implementation-specific, and requiring all clients to track the exact number of executed BPF instructions for consensus is costly and unnecessary. Such precision is not essential for protocol-level consensus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this approach is effective, it introduces additional work and complexity. These mechanisms are often implementation-specific, and requiring all clients to track the exact number of executed BPF instructions for consensus is costly and unnecessary. Such precision is not essential for protocol-level consensus, especially since these cases are rare.
```

None

## New Terminology

- [Basic Block](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_block):i In the context of JIT execution and BPF processing, a Basic Block is a sequence of BPF instructions that forms a single, linear flow of control with no loops or conditional branches except for the entry and exit points. It represents a segment of code where execution starts at the first instruction and proceeds sequentially through to the last instruction without deviation. The Basic Block is characterized by its predictable execution path, allowing for efficient budget checks and optimizations, as its Compute Unit (CU) cost can be determined before execution and verified at the end of the block.

## Detailed Design

At banking stage [here](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/master/core/src/banking_stage/committer.rs#L99) and replay stage [here](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/master/ledger/src/blockstore_processor.rs#L239) where Transaction's executed_units is checked, implement new logic:
```
let execution_cu = match transaction.execution_results {
    Ok(_) || Err(TransactionError::CustomError(_)) => committed_tx.executed_cu,
    _ => transaction.requested_cu,

> };

Author: Not too familiar with InstructionError, wondering if correct to use Requested_cu for any error but `TransactionError::CustomError(_)`

Reviewer: This is the most important part to get right. In Agave's VM, I think it's
```
EbpfError::DivideByZero
EbpfError::DivideOverflow
EbpfError::CallOutsideTextSegment
EbpfError::InvalidInstruction
EbpfError::InvalidVirtualAddress
```
I'm not sure exactly what these translate to as `TransactionError`s though.
In firedancer, it's maybe something like
```
#define FD_VM_ERR_SIGSPLIT    ( -9) /* split multiword instruction (e.g. jump into the middle of a multiword instruction) */
#define FD_VM_ERR_SIGILL      (-12) /* illegal instruction (e.g. opcode is not valid) */
#define FD_VM_ERR_SIGSEGV     (-13) /* illegal memory address (e.g. read/write to an address not backed by any memory) */
#define FD_VM_ERR_SIGBUS      (-14) /* misaligned memory address (e.g. read/write to an address with inappropriate alignment) */
#define FD_VM_ERR_SIGRDONLY   (-15) /* illegal write (e.g. write to a read only address) */
#define FD_VM_ERR_SIGFPE      (-18) /* divide by zero */
```

Author: indeed, what about `AccessViolation` in agave's VM, should it also be considered as "irregular failure"?

I failed to find where EbpfError converted to InstructionError, there are some casting at `bpf_loader`, is it the right place to look at @Lichtso ?

Reviewer 2: It happens here: https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/7741b250a6e76afc9e7385ceb64c341f4bc21622/programs/bpf_loader/src/lib.rs#L1473

None

## New Terminology

- [Basic Block](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_block):i In the context of JIT execution and BPF processing, a Basic Block is a sequence of BPF instructions that forms a single, linear flow of control with no loops or conditional branches except for the entry and exit points. It represents a segment of code where execution starts at the first instruction and proceeds sequentially through to the last instruction without deviation. The Basic Block is characterized by its predictable execution path, allowing for efficient budget checks and optimizations, as its Compute Unit (CU) cost can be determined before execution and verified at the end of the block.

## Detailed Design

At banking stage [here](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/master/core/src/banking_stage/committer.rs#L99) and replay stage [here](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/master/ledger/src/blockstore_processor.rs#L239) where Transaction's executed_units is checked, implement new logic:
```
let execution_cu = match transaction.execution_results {
    Ok(_) || Err(TransactionError::CustomError(_)) => committed_tx.executed_cu,
    _ => transaction.requested_cu,
};

> ... ...

Author: alternatively, instead of charging different CUs based on `TransactionError` at call sites, we could make VM to consume CUs differently - deplete CU meter in case of "irregular failure"; so the call sites (banking stage or replay) don't need to change. I thought this is what @Lichtso implied somewhere.
